doc/build_system.md, before:

# AeroSync Build System Documentation

## Overview

AeroSync uses CMake as its build system to create a modern, monolithic 64-bit x86_64 kernel. The build system is designed to be modular, supporting various configurations and targets for development and deployment.

## Prerequisites

To build AeroSync, you will need the following tools:
a
*   **CMake:** Version 3.30 or newer (or, edit the `CMakeLists.txt` file to use an older version)
*   **LLVM**: Version 18.0.0 or newer recommended (including clang, lld, and llvm-*)
> ⚠️ AeroSync ONLY supports LLVM-based compiler (e.g., clang, icx, aocc); GCC is not tested whatsoever (don't ask me why)
*   **NASM:** The Netwide Assembler
*   **xorriso:** A tool to create and manipulate ISO 9660 images
*   **lld:** The LLVM linker
> ⚠️ LLD is required for LTO builds
*   **Limine:** The Limine bootloader resources must be available on the host system.
> CMake will automatically download them if they are not found.
*   **Python:** The python interpreter, primarly for tools and kernel configuration generation.
*   **Kconfiglib:** A Python library for parsing Kconfig files.

- **optional:** either used by me and/is not needed for building AeroSync
    - mimalloc: glibc's ptmalloc2 sucks
    - llvm-*: replaces GNU equivalents
    - qemu-*: obviously
    - bochs: when I can't use by real computer
    - VMware & VirtualBox: extra fancy
    - ninja: faster than make (theoretically)
    - Arch Linux

## Build Process

### Presets (recommended) 

#### Available presets (cmake --list-presets): 
- `amd64` - release kernel (fastest, less overhead, w/o debug symbols) (recommended for the lowest latency – not explicitly safe for production use)
- `amd64-hardened` - release kernel with hardened security features (moderate performance, w/o debug symbols) (recommended for normal uses)
- `amd64-dev` - development kernel (no optimization, w/debug symbols) (recommended for debugging)
- `amd64-dev-hardened` - development kernel with hardened security features (slowest, no optimization, w/debug symbols) (recommended for most predictitable builds)

1. **Configure the build:**
   ```bash
   cmake --preset <preset>
   ```
2. **Build the preset:**
   ```bash
   cmake --build --preset <preset>
   ```

> note: if there is already a .config in the project's root, it will use the current config rather than the config correspond to the preset

### Manual configuration (not recommended)

1. **Kconfig setup: (optional)**
    ```bash
   cp kconfig/configs/<your desired config> .config
   ```

2. **Configure the build:**
   ```bash
   cmake -B build -G Ninja -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=cmake/toolchain/AeroSyncClang.cmake # -DAEROSYNC_DEFONCONFIG="config here if skip step 1."
   ```

3. **Build:**
   ```bash
   cmake --build build --parallel $(nproc)
   ```

### Build Artifacts

The build process generates:
- `aerosync.hybrid.iso` - A hybrid bootable ISO image in the `build/` directory
- `bootdir/` - Directory containing the kernel image, kernel extensions, and bootloader components
- 
### Compile time options & kernel configuration

There are two ways to configure the kernel:
- **CMake (cache):** `cmake -D<OPTION>=<VALUE> <SRC_DIR>` or `cmake-gui <SRC_DIR>` or `ccmake <SRC_DIR>`
- **Kconfig:** `python -m *config <SRC_DIR>` or `<GENERATOR> *config`

#### Notable CMake options:
- `AEROSYNC_INITRD`: Path to a CPIO archive to be used as an initial ramdisk. If provided:
  - The file will be copied to `/module/` in the ISO.
  - The kernel command line will be automatically appended with `initrd=<filename>`.
  - The kernel will unpack it into the root `tmpfs` during early boot.

## ISO Generation

The build system creates a hybrid ISO that supports both BIOS and UEFI boot modes using the Limine bootloader:

1. Creates a boot directory structure
2. Copies kernel, bootloader binaries, and configuration
3. Generates a hybrid ISO using xorriso with both BIOS and UEFI boot support

## Development Targets

### Emulator/VM Targets

- `run` - Run in QEMU with UEFI firmware
- `run-bios` - Run in QEMU with legacy BIOS
- `bochs-run` - Run in Bochs emulator
- `vbox-run` - Run in VirtualBox
- `vmw-run` - Run in VMware

### Debugging Targets

- `dump` - Generate disassembly and symbol files
- `menuconfig` - Interactive kernel configuration

### VM Setup Targets

- `vbox-create-vm` - Create VirtualBox VM
- `vbox-delete-vm` - Delete VirtualBox VM
- `vmw-setup` - Setup VMware VM
- `vmw-delete-vm` - Delete VMware VM

## Configuration System

AeroSync uses Kconfig [(more)](kconfig.md) for kernel configuration, allowing fine-grained control over features and options. The configuration system integrates with CMake to generate appropriate build definitions.

Commit message:

ported linux kfifo queue and several other stuff, also added initial GCC support, Happy Lunar New Year!

doc/build_system.md, after:

# AeroSync Build System Documentation

## Overview

AeroSync uses CMake as its build system to create a modern, monolithic 64-bit x86_64 kernel. The build system is designed to be modular, supporting various configurations and targets for development and release.

## Prerequisites

To build AeroSync, you will need the following tools:

*   **CMake:** Version 3.30 or newer (or, edit the `CMakeLists.txt` file to use an older version)
*   **LLVM**: Version 18.0.0 or newer recommended (including clang, lld, and llvm-*)
*   **NASM:** The Netwide Assembler
*   **xorriso:** A tool to create and manipulate ISO 9660 images
*   **lld:** The LLVM linker
> ⚠️ LLD is required for LTO builds
*   **Limine:** The Limine bootloader resources must be available on the host system.
> CMake will automatically download them if they are not found.
*   **Python:** The python interpreter, primarly for tools and kernel configuration generation.
*   **Kconfiglib:** A Python library for parsing Kconfig files.

- **optional:** either used by me and/is not needed for building AeroSync
    - mimalloc: glibc's ptmalloc2 sucks
    - llvm-*: replaces GNU equivalents
    - qemu-*: obviously
    - bochs: when I can't use by real computer
    - VMware & VirtualBox: extra fancy
    - ninja: faster than make (theoretically)
    - Arch Linux

## Build Process

### Presets (recommended) 

#### Available presets (cmake --list-presets): 
- `amd64` - release kernel (fastest, less overhead, w/o debug symbols) (recommended for the lowest latency – not explicitly safe for production use)
- `amd64-hardened` - release kernel with hardened security features (moderate performance, w/o debug symbols) (recommended for normal uses)
- `amd64-dev` - development kernel (no optimization, w/debug symbols) (recommended for debugging)
- `amd64-dev-hardened` - development kernel with hardened security features (slowest, no optimization, w/debug symbols) (recommended for most predictitable builds)

1. **Configure the build:**
   ```bash
   cmake --preset <preset>
   ```
2. **Build the preset:**
   ```bash
   cmake --build --preset <preset>
   ```

> note: if there is already a .config in the project's root, it will use the current config rather than the config correspond to the preset

### Manual configuration (not recommended)

1. **Kconfig setup: (optional)**
    ```bash
   cp kconfig/configs/<your desired config> .config
   ```

2. **Configure the build:**
   ```bash
   cmake -B build -G Ninja -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=cmake/toolchain/AeroSyncClang.cmake # -DAEROSYNC_DEFONCONFIG="config here if skip step 1."
   ```

3. **Build:**
   ```bash
   cmake --build build --parallel $(nproc)
   ```

### Build Artifacts

The build process generates:
- `aerosync.hybrid.iso` - A hybrid bootable ISO image in the `build/` directory
- `bootdir/` - Directory containing the kernel image, kernel extensions, and bootloader components
- 
### Compile time options & kernel configuration

There are two ways to configure the kernel:
- **CMake (cache):** `cmake -D<OPTION>=<VALUE> <SRC_DIR>` or `cmake-gui <SRC_DIR>` or `ccmake <SRC_DIR>`
- **Kconfig:** `python -m *config <SRC_DIR>` or `<GENERATOR> *config`

#### Notable CMake options:
- `AEROSYNC_INITRD`: Path to a CPIO archive to be used as an initial ramdisk. If provided:
  - The file will be copied to `/module/` in the ISO.
  - The kernel command line will be automatically appended with `initrd=<filename>`.
  - The kernel will unpack it into the root `tmpfs` during early boot.

## Using GCC
As you may know, AeroSync does not support GCC for a while, but i have considered to support it
but currently most GCC builds are broken and unusable, but if you still want to use GCC to compile the kernel
please use the following toolchain files:
- `AeroSyncGcc.cmake`: uses `x86_64-unknown-elf` compiler, you can get a [prebuilt](https://github.com/assembler-0/prebuilt-freestanding-toolchains) here
- `AeroSyncHostGcc.cmake`: uses host GCC compiler (idk why would you use this)

## ISO Generation

The build system creates a hybrid ISO that supports both BIOS and UEFI boot modes using the Limine bootloader:

1. Creates a boot directory structure
2. Copies kernel, bootloader binaries, and configuration
3. Generates a hybrid ISO using xorriso with both BIOS and UEFI boot support

## Development Targets

### Emulator/VM Targets

- `run` - Run in QEMU with UEFI firmware
- `run-bios` - Run in QEMU with legacy BIOS
- `bochs-run` - Run in Bochs emulator
- `vbox-run` - Run in VirtualBox
- `vmw-run` - Run in VMware

### Debugging Targets

- `dump` - Generate disassembly and symbol files
- `menuconfig` - Interactive kernel configuration

### VM Setup Targets

- `vbox-create-vm` - Create VirtualBox VM
- `vbox-delete-vm` - Delete VirtualBox VM
- `vmw-setup` - Setup VMware VM
- `vmw-delete-vm` - Delete VMware VM

## Configuration System

AeroSync uses Kconfig [(more)](kconfig.md) for kernel configuration. The configuration system integrates with CMake to generate appropriate build definitions.
